So but before I get to introduce Mark to you guys, our lovely community, let's go through our usual news 
roundup. This is going to be a bit shorter and faster because we have quite a bit to discuss with our dear 
node operators who who are here in this call can see them in the audience. So first, let's talk a little bit 
about what has been happening with Nim over the past two weeks. 1s All right. So first of all, 
importantly, there's a silly meme contest happening right now. So some instructions will be left in the 
chat. Make sure to join. And if you have some memes to share, then I believe this is the last day to do so. 
So make sure not to miss it. And then, um, the community will be voting for the best memes. And the 
voting period is the 23rd to the 30th of September. So make sure to participate in that as well. It is a 
pretty fun little thing. I'm seeing some pretty dank means to be, to be completely honest. So you're still 
not late to to win the contest. 1s And then 1s moving on very quickly to the biggest news item that 
happened. I'm actually skipping a few just for the sake of time, but the biggest news item that happened 
over the past two weeks, which I keep talking about, is named Shipyard. So as you know, we're about to 
embark on one of the largest projects that has ever embarked on, which is going to be a huge educational 
program, which is also fun and gamified for guys. If you participated in last year's Shipyard Academy, 
this is going to be similar, but way bigger. 2s Way more fun. Hopefully so. Early bird submissions 
already started last week and you can still get the early bird role in Discord generally. Just join us in 
Early Bird before the 24th. I believe the deadline is the 24 night CDT. So if you do want to be an early 
bird, then make sure to apply instructions will be shared in the chat and also links. 1s And then let's not 
forget also our our referral contest. So if you if you want to bring your friends, if you have a lot of 
friends, make sure to bring them because because 1s there's a special prize pool for for our pro campaign 
and you can you can win up to 10,000 tokens. One one important info a piece of information when it 
comes to the when it comes to the earlybird. 2s A contest. Is that an actual friend only counts if if they 
finish at least stage one of shipyard. So just bringing a friend is not going to be. 1s Not mind on the 
actual participant count. Um, and then probably a few of you are wondering, you know, if you already 
participated in shipyard then shipyard Academy last year, then whether you should or can and should 
participate in. Shipyard as well. You definitely should. In fact, we have something very special cooking 
for our shipyard, OGs. Your eyes peeled and in general, just keep an eye on our channels for the coming 
few weeks because it is upon us. We will be kickstarting the actual program on the ninth and before that 
leading up to it quite a few. 2s I'm going to share more details, so make sure to keep your eyes on our 
telegram and discord channels. And since I have Nikola with me, I thought he could also give a quick 
update on on the Ambassador program, because there has been quite a bit going on on that front as well. 
Yeah. Hi, everyone. Nice to meet you here. And I see lots of 2s ninjas on our call, which is super 
exciting. I think that this year, the end of the year will be super big for everyone 1s From privacy 
advocates to developers. We have so many things under the hood that we will reveal to you 1s also on the 
product side. And what we want to do is through the shipper especially, and through our Ambassador 
program, to be ensure that people all around the world would really advocate for them without us 
micromanaging their activities like our program increased last week. Uh, they're almost one K plus 
people enrolled to the program. So now we have around 2.5 K people participating in our cadet 
campaign, which is super cool because generally speaking from these people we could select true ninjas 
full on ninjas who would become a real ambassadors of the name and who could represent us in different 
countries. We see a huge interest in local event delivery, so people from Vietnam to Nigeria are doing 
events all around the world small issuance. They explain people, they train people. What's normal about 
how to 1s why you should care about privacy. Also, we are running a huge campaign to facilitate local 
use cases. So the next time you pitch them in India, for example, you use a local scenario that really 
crucial for the local privacy market. Or when you pitch them in Mexico, you will mention journalists and 
their freedom of speech protection. So it's really good to see that we are not just working like solo 
ambassadors, but generally speaking, we are covering. 1s The interesting geography is beyond just 
Europe. And for example, a new ambassador is promoting him 1s through the Brazilian favelas, which is 
interesting angle especially that could be linked to our VPN product 1s so available on mobile in the 
future. At the same time, there are like high grade privacy people, hacktivists are coming around and they 
want to experiment with us. And it's really good to see a pretty diverse crowd within the ambassadors 
U1
covering. Starting from node operators in Ukraine, for example, 1s or ending with the privacy researchers 
in India, which is cool to see. Any personal questions to me regarding on the program? No, actually, I 
know basically everything because we're working on it pretty closely, so. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Let me let 
me then let me add one more thing. So the whole philosophy behind the program, what we are doing 
right now, because we all know that really hard to really grasp means especially if you never used any 
private tools, if you never cared about your data privacy. So shippers in this sense really like accelerating 
speed up people, onboarding into ninjas. And in this sense we are trying to link not just. 1s Let's say 
crypto people who will be interested in the projects and tokens and stuff, but also people who are beyond 
the pre and or beyond the privacy. So through thermal vegetation, they could really understand how to 
help us. And my big role is to 1s facilitate some sort of meaningful contribution towards our storytelling 
and our mission. Because many people who are jumping into a bazaar program and they do lots of 
ambassadors program at the same time and sometimes they miss whole point of why privacy really 
matters, why data privacy is a sensitive topic, why they should care, how the future should look like. And 
in this sense, I'm super thankful to lots of cadets and ninjas who are working hard to 1s educate people to 
review the tasks of the cadets, to shape their narratives, to fight with some sort of copycats when people 
are just automatically participates in a booster program instead of bringing a nice, meaningful 
contribution. So in this sense, we want our ambassadors and cadets to be real name extensions like a 
human mixed net instead of just random avatars in that sense. And we bring a really good human aspect 
on how we want to scale both program in quality and quantity and just just shut out to everyone who 
could really show off the super skills from, you know, I've seen avatars from cognition who is super 
helpful Ukraine to Andre who's helpful with shaping token storytelling and bringing it to more people. 
And last but not least, 1s Nick, who really has the substance to tell to a bigger crowd? And thanks node 
operators for understanding why mixing it mission is. Mm. And just a quick note on how closely the new 
ambassador program and shipyard related. So. As Nicole mentioned, we're seeing a lot of a lot of help in 
promoting, getting people excited about shipyard from our existing cadets. And one of the important 
goals of shipyard stage three, which is going to be the specialisation stage, is is to onboard people to the 
to the ninja programme. So these two things go hand in hand and they kind of co-create each other. Yeah, 
Yeah. And I also want to add here that one of our big missions in the moment is to connect the old core 
community members and core contributor, the newcomers, because we truly believe that the Elders of 
New could really share experience and knowledge how to contribute to the right way. And in this sense, 
they could kind of like help the others or lead by example. Because after the shipwrecked, we will have 
thousands of people circulating around us and they really need help to kind of understand where to go. 
Good example is how Daniel, our head of growth in LatAm, takes care of onboarding our ninjas in 
Brazil, in Mexico. So in this sense, they feel that they're part of a bigger team and at the same time they 
understand what specific activities will help us to succeed in specific region like it would be really. For 
example, it would be really hard to get many nodes in favelas because people don't know that many of 
them has proper notebooks. But those people could really use our VPN for specific activities while on 
another market like India is super big in terms of developers market. As you could see, all these Polygon 
or Solana hackathons, they attracted thousands of people. So we are experimenting with those 2s events, 
specifically sending some ninjas there, try to explore the use cases for privacy for the next networks and 
in this sense, find out certain key to specific specific local market. And in this sense, the shipyard is 
extremely helpful here. But at the same time, we think that 2s soon we will consolidate a certain balance 
between newcomers, the ones who really want to contribute and stay with us and the ones who already 
delivered so many solutions with months or a years. 1s And a certain well defined balance is a good 
success metric for nice community growth. And so those kind of taking a lead here. 2s Thanks for that 
update, Michaela. I think we should probably move on to our conversation with Mark now. 2s Maybe, 
maybe a very quick note on why actually I'm here. And that's also that's also tied to a PSA. So the team is 
gathering in Spain, in Barcelona, near Barcelona for our yearly meeting. So all of the team is coming 
together here, which means probably a bit less responsive for members. So if you if you have any 
projects going with us, then please bear with us because this is the the one and only time where the entire 
team comes together. You know, we're fully we're fully remote company so it's very meet from time to 
that is happening next week and I came a bit early to see. 2s Yeah. Thanks, everyone. And after this 
annual meeting, we will bring many great news that will be lost during shipyard, before and after. Take 
care. 4s And with that, let me change to my headphones. 6s And over to you, Mark. How is it going? 
Hopefully that wasn't too long and boring. No. All good. Can you hear me Well? Yes. Yes, loud and 
clear. It is amazing to have you on. 1s So before before we get into our conversation about open exit 
nodes and and projects and all of that stuff, I would like to let our community know that this time around, 
as always, we're keeping an eye on the chat and we're going to be answering questions. So whenever 
Mark or I say something that you would want to know more about, then please, please feel free to ask 
away. But I would also like to know that we're going to be focusing on node operator questions, 
specifically having two having to do with Project Smoosh, Smoosh as this is a pretty big change for for 
node operators. We want to, want to make sure that. SOS. And on that note, before we get into projects 
much, I would like you to introduce yourself. How is it going? Very young. All good? Yeah, I joined 
them about three months ago as a lead product manager to take care of the product called Nem Connect, 
which is the B2C client that allows users to connect to the net. And at some point in the future to a VPN 
that we have already announced. Yeah, so far so good. 3s So as the community probably knows, because 
we've been talking about it quite a bit and quite often we are really gearing up for mass adoption and part 
of that is releasing VPN. So you joined 1s at a pretty critical moment to name. So how has that been 
where you dropped into a deep water right away? 2s Yeah, it's quite technical. So I'm not coming from 
from the world of Web three or network. I'm coming more from like the fintech industry. So I used to 
work at Revolute, for example. So I'm more coming from the mainstream 1s world and mainstream 
software. I'm trying to bring that expertise of, you know, bringing nice apps, nice UX and, and user 
growth to to them. But so far so good. It's been quite a wild ride and getting to learn privately is key for 
the, you know network and cryptography and so on. It's quite exciting. 3s It is exciting indeed. And guess 
that that kind of brings us right up to our main topic, which is going to be Project Smoosh. So maybe 
think before we do anything else, let's walk people through what this means and maybe why it's 
happening now and what it could mean for for node operators. 2s Um, sure. Even though I'm not the best 
person to talk about this project, 1s which would be more for a technical person. So Project Smosh is 
going to be about basically merging all the node operators role into one binary, if I'm not mistaken. So 
the gateway is the exit nodes, entry nodes and so on. And as like an what I'm more keen to talk about is 
an initiative that is connected to projects which is basically changing a bit. The behaviour we have for the 
exit gateways and turning that behaviour from something where we have an allow list that is app based to 
where you allow Matrix and 1s Telegram and a few other crypto apps to be accessed through the net via 
connection and change that to more of a wider list that allows people to connect to any type of service or 
a website that they want through the mix net. So again, projects high level. I can talk about it, but not my 
expertise and not what I'm currently working on. And then the second initiative, which is about opening 
exit nodes, this is something we can discuss and address concerns. Yeah, I think sorry for referring to it 
as projects. In my mind it's it's sort of one and the same or two sides of the same coin. But, but yeah, 
what's the point here basically is is the, is going from, from a whiteness model to a black list model 
which is a pretty important change. So maybe let's, let's talk about that change a little bit. So why is it 
necessary and why is it necessary at this stage? 2s Yes. So, I mean, again, you're back to the roots of the 
of the mission of Nim. So Nim wants to offer privacy for everyone and everywhere. And, you know, we 
believe that if we have a very limited. 2s An app that only allows you to protect your privacy for very, 
very specific use cases. There are a few messaging apps and a few crypto apps. Then we fail on our 
mission to offer privacy for everyone and everywhere. And we believe that to go there and to achieve 
that mission, we have to basically allow you to protect through the net all your online use cases or as 
many use cases as you want, as you feel comfortable with. And so we believe that having this change is 
something very important for the end users. And we are aware that the node operators are also users of 
the of the service and that there is a technical, legal, operational concerns that have been raised and we 
are definitely going to address them and work on them together with the community. But yeah, we 
believe that this is an important change for for our end users. 3s Definitely is. And a huge thanks for for 
everyone who filled out our our survey which you put out about this change. And we also put out a 
document which summarizes it's an evolving document and an FAQ that we put out which summarizes 
everything that that is should know about about this change. So thumbing through the feedback that we 
got. Maybe. Salazar Can you please grab links to to the doc and and the FAQ that that's recently put 
together. So thumbing through that feedback, my my sense was that it's it's overall positive. But what 
people are concerned about is the legal aspect of this. So maybe I think you and I should talk a little bit 
about what what operating and open so what switching to a to the blacklist model from from the white 
list model and operating operating something that is similar to a tour exit node and functionality means 
legally speaking. 2s Very severe indeed. Haven't seen the latest results, but I've seen the temporary 
results with the part of the answers. And indeed the legal concerns were basically the main concern that 
came up in the in the in the open feedback section and then the technical and operational concerns were 
second. 2s So yeah, just to maybe clarify before we go into the legal question in terms of technical and 
operational setup, So indeed today we have an analyst that is an IP based analyst where we say, okay, for 
telegram, we basically whitelist or allow lists, IP address A, B and C, which correspond to telegram 
services, A, B and C, and we have that basically for I think there is like 20 or 30 addresses and that allow 
list. And we want to switch to a much more permissive model where basically people are allowed to 
connect to anything they want, provided that it's not like abuse material, that it's not spam and so on and 
so forth. And what we will likely have is not only a denialist but more of a combination of a. So we will 
have probably an IP based denialist where we say these IPS are known to be abusive spam or whatever, 
and we block them and we will have likely also an allow list for ports where you can say, okay, you 
allow traffic on Http Https and this and that, FTP, Sftp, whatever you want, 1s and then the rest of the 
ports can be blocked. So that is going to be like the likely combination of this. Now talking about the 
legal side, like the legal and operational side of things. So the short answer is that we don't know exactly 
what it's going to take to to do this because it's quite new. And the best we could offer is to say, look, 
more Exit Node is something that has been running for the last ten years, ten plus years, and there's like a 
lot of online evidence about what, what it means to run a Tor exit node and what is the legal framework 
and what are the potential issues you can run into by by doing this yourself. And so this is what we have 
done in document that has been shared by by Pseudo and the community team, which is we don't know 
yet. We are seeking advice from our Swiss and US lawyers. But look at what this is like looking at what 
has happened to Tor. This is the synthesis of like the key points you should be aware of, and these are the 
risks that are associated with running an exit node. 1s Hmm. Maybe also, we could talk a little bit about 
how, legally speaking, it might be different to run a name exit node versus a Tor exit node. So there's, 
there's the difference of, of hidden services Tor has that we don't. What does that mean legally speaking? 
3s Be honest, it's very much of an unknown because every service is brand new. It's not as well known as 
Tor. And Tor has this aura of it's a nonprofit. It helps, you know, journalists and activists and people out 
there. And so when people are, you know, getting into like not trouble, but legal questions about what is 
Tor, it's quite easy to explain in the sense that it's been out there for quite a while and it's a non-profit and 
there's plenty of material available to to to support that. For them, it's going to be a bit harder to answer, 
like, what is it going to take? Because Nim is much less known. There's going to be also much less traffic 
than tours. So potentially less risks. But still, it's a very open question so far. 1s Hmm. And then what 
we're going to do is like, reuse as much as we store has developed and say, look, we have like a base that 
we provide to the community, we also want to set up the tools and the wikis and all the things that the 
community can also, you know, like create those things themselves. So, for example, somebody in 
Ukraine has mentioned that they want to really potentially like local node operators in Ukraine to be like, 
what could be the legal set up, Think like these type of initiative initiatives are amazing when we can get 
the community to also like help itself and then we'll do as much as we can to support that. 1s Mm. 3s All 
right, Wait a second. Let me look through my notes. 5s I think maybe 2s if we could expand a bit on 
those on those tools because I know that a forum is coming where people can people can. And you just 
mentioned that people can help each other. So why is that? Why is that important? 2s So basically we. So 
what we have today so we have already the node operators channel matrix. I don't know if everyone has 
has joined that or has access to that, but so this is more of a chat. And what we want to have is also 
something a bit more stable as in either a wiki or something on on our. And why is it important is that we 
had interviews with people running for exit nodes and they say one of the strengths of Tor is that they 
have like a very strong community and basically before you set up that exit node, you have access to 
plenty of material but also access to plenty of people that have been running them for a long time. And so 
that may help you answer lots of questions about the technicalities of it, the operational setup, the 
potential, the legal framework around around that. And this is something that has been mentioned as 
being super important. So people feel like they do something that may have some implication, but at least 
they're very well supported, not only by the by the main parent association, which is Tor, but also by the 
Tor community. And we want to have people like not operators have that same experience and that same 
feeling that they're surrounded and they're being given advice. 2s Mm hmm. And I guess it's also worth 
mentioning, this is no no guarantee of anything. But looking back at the pre long history of tours, there's 
yet to be a case, one against someone who operated operated at a tour exit node. So in some some regions 
it is restricted in one way or another. But but we don't know of anything that that actually happened to 
anyone who operated it to our node. Is that correct? 1s Right. So, so far, so the people that we have 
spoken with from from today say that nobody has been. 3s For running an exit node. But yes, there has 
been people that have been interrogated by the police as question being witness in some cases. So that is 
stuff that can happen. But what we want to do is like be as give as meaningful advice as possible so that 
we minimise these type of situation and that ultimately we have a great experience for the node operators 
that allows us to have a great experience for the end users. 4s This will obviously evolve. And the 
knowledge base as as 1s this change goes live and people start operating these nodes, the knowledge base 
well will build itself basically. So it's up to us in our community to build that together. I think with that, 
unless you want to you want to add something to this topic, we can maybe move on to talk about 
incentives a little bit. Perfect. 2s Okay, so what will incentive. Sorry. Go, go, go, go. No, I don't want to. 
I don't even want to ask. Ask a question. If you know. If you know what you want to say, just go ahead. 
1s Nosso incentives is definitely a good points to this. Something that gets raised also in the in the 
feedback from the community, which is in the end I'm going to take more risk. So in the risk reward 
perspective, what is it? What's in it for me as a node operator? And the answer is we don't know yet, but 
very likely it's kind of a it's fair to assume that if we encourage you to take more risks, there's probably 
going to be higher rewards for for the people that that turn on and opt in to run these exit exit nodes. 4s
My understanding is that is that 1s this is going to be the case or the incentives themselves won't change. 
But but participation in the active set for don't quote me on this, though. I saw a message from Harry, 
which I'm going to look up. But my understanding is that participation in the active set of nodes which 
which do have 1s the the deny list enabled 2s will be will be higher. So that way so even though 
incentives themselves won't change structurally, functionally people will get more rewards if they if they 
operate an open exit node. 1s Yeah. So again, the details have not been. 1s Have not been defined. But 
there is. It's fair to assume that if you take more risk, you will get rewards. 4s We have a we have a 
question from Kovacs. 1s How about legal requirements for node operators? That's back to legals. And 
I'm not sure we can answer this, but let's let's see if we can. So how about legal requirements for node 
operators? Think of logging and log retention policy. Already. Any insights on that? 3s So, I mean, the 
legal requirements, to be honest, we don't really know. So it's something that we are currently running 
with the Swiss and and us lawyers. 1s We don't expect that there's any requirements in the sense that 
you're not obliged by the law to do anything. So it's more that, you know, if really bad, the main legal 
risk that we have is that there is some really bad traffic going through the exit node and then somebody 
like the police or like. 1s Like your music major, or somebody else says, okay, this is illicit traffic and we 
have questions basically to the node operators, like, what is this traffic? Where is it coming from? So I'm 
not sure that there is specific requirements to say, okay, you have to log this and that. It's more you have 
to be ready to answer that. You're just like in the end, some kind of telecommunication provider that 
you're not responsible for the traffic that goes through you. You're only passing data packets and that 
you're but you're not responsible for this but this. So bear with us. We're going to basically provide like 
some guidance for some domain countries where we operate and then for the rest, provide the tools so 
that the community can self-organize on that. Mm hmm. And then I guess the same is true for for 
DMCA. The MTA was the other thing that came up in the in the feedback as a question. Quite often 
DMCA is digital. Wait, what is it? I want to say quickly and it was it's basically basically a content 
copyright management system which 1s which makes sure that that things are not pirated. That's my 
that's my 2s go. Yeah, exactly. So there's two main legal topics, basically with running these exit nodes. 
So one, as you say, is the DMCA, which is high volume and low risk, which is basically you're going to 
get requests from these music music companies or movie companies or whatever, or lawyers defending 
them that they're going to tell you, Hey, you have downloaded these and these music files or movies. 1s
And then the answer to that is that we're going to develop like some template, like prefilled template to 
say, Yeah, this is not me downloading. It's like somebody downloading through my node and I'm just a 
node operator and I'm, you know, subject to these regulations and basically it's not my fault, so fuck off. 
So this is one thing and that's going to be taken care of very easily. And the people that we have spoken 
with at Tor, they say, yeah, this these are typically requests that you get, but it's very easy to. Kick them 
out. And then the second thing is going to be more like illicit content, drug abuse and so on, where 
potentially this is, you know, more open ended and this is more this is where the actual trouble can 
happen. But GMC is definitely not in trouble. Something you have to handle, but it's not there's nothing 
behind it. 4s Okay, So once again, I guess we can fall back on, on, on tour. So it's it's not entirely true 
that what what what an exit node operator will be doing is very unique and all brand new because it's 
functionally very similar to tour. Right. So if we hear, you know, the for example, DMCA, DMCA 
claims are very easy to handle with with just standard response. 1s That will also be true of that will also 
be true of of name node operators. Right. 1s Yeah. So DMCA think is almost a non topic. So yes we need 
to be ready and provide like the templates and the autoresponder autoresponder and so on. But legally I 
think there's like very limited risk as long as, you know, operators act in good faith and answer to these 
requests. Yeah. The question where it's more open ended, it's on the rest you know does for and the 
whole like nonprofit and the tour brand helps you a bit more than the name with them being like new the 
new kid on the block that, you know, law enforcement doesn't know about. So that's the only question. 2s
Makes sense. Another question from a from Kovacs. I don't know if you can answer this. So question is 
whether people who do operate 1s open exit nodes get more rewards or people who don't get less 
rewards. 4s Yeah. I don't know, to be honest. Um, so again, the details for the rewards have not been 
defined 1s yet. I think the only thing I can say is, you know, if we go and proceed with that change, the 
expected traffic that we're going to get is going to be ten x or 100 x compared to what we have today, 
because it's not going to be limited to only like a few messaging and crypto apps, but it's going to be open 
to everything and we're going to have an explosion in traffic, meaning also, you know, much better usage 
of the servers. And ideally, I mean the the revenues and ideally the profits for operators should increase a 
lot, even though potentially the increase per user or the or sorry, even though the profit per user or profit 
per data packet might be slightly lower. 4s I'm still looking for that message from Harry, but I can't find 
it, so I'll just focus on the conversation instead. I think I think from here, unless there's anything burning 
or jumping out at you that you want to add here. 2s Nope. How good? 1s I think maybe we should talk a 
little bit about what happens from here. So we have been collecting feedback. That feedback has been 1s
like, besides these these few these few things that we just talk through mainly, mainly legal concerns are 
mainly legal. 2s And maybe what will happen from here is what we should talk about. So what's the 
timeline? Is this change finalized? Is it. Is it definitely happening? Will people be able to opt out or is it 
or they can't? So let's talk about the stakes and the timeline from here. 2s Yes. So currently this is still the 
initiative that is not going through. It's more of a more of a project where we want to assess appetite from 
the community, understand the technicalities of it, understand the legal risks. And we're waiting for the 
feedback from the lawyers to see, you know, is this something that we can go with or not? And again, we 
hope or I hope that this is something that we can proceed with because really the end value that users get 
out of this and the overall value for of the service is quite dependent on this. And the more use cases you 
can you can cover with the mixed net, the better. So for now, again, it's more of a research project, but at 
least personally I hope that this will go through and yeah. 2s And then the second part of your question 
was. 2s A timeline. Timeline. 2s Yeah. 2s Hard to say, to be honest. There's lots of things going on. 2s
The two main ones being this the VPN thing that we have mentioned and the update of the app where we 
have to accommodate the app for combining both the VPN and the mixed net. 3s Yeah. And only then. 
So this is more of a. 1s More of a back end type of change, more of a net core network change. And this 
is something that I'm less involved in from a technical perspective. So I'm going to not answer on this 
one because this also has to do with Project Smoosh, right? My understanding and also neither of us are 
in the technical teams, guys, so please bear with us. But my understanding is that first network requesters 
and gateways are going to be smooshed together and that's stage one. And then following that, 1s
gateways and MCs nodes will be smooshed together, if that's what you mean. I'm not sure what the what 
the exact dates on any of this, but but that's my understanding. 2s Yeah. And so for this whole initiative 
of. So you're correct on projects and on this whole initiative about exit nodes, like technically the changes 
are quite minimal. If you were to proceed with this because it would be only to switch from basically 
from a list to a deny list. So this is a very small change to do. I think the bigger change that would have 
to be done is if we proceed with this and have to change the reward structure. For example, this is more 
of an unknown. I have no clue about the change, the changes that are required there and and potentially 
all the there is maybe some more things that have to be developed. So once feedback from Tor, for 
example, was. You know, as a node operator, if I have this exit node, I can analyze basically what's going 
on through it via a tool called Nix. Not to be confused with the Nims index. 1s And that basically allows 
you to manage the Yeah. What's going on with the node, the quality of the service. Maybe you have 
some, some rate limiting for certain users and so on. And so we have to see these things that we want to 
offer also from the beginning. Is this something that helps provide a good quality of service? So all of 
these questions have not been answered. 1s So that's why it's a bit hard to to provide like a definitive 
answer on the on a potential timeline. Mm hmm. 2s By the way, just sorry for the for the unrelated 1s
comment, but I found the message from Harry and what he says. Maybe it's not as final as it sounds from 
from his message, but he said this AP one evolve per se is just a change of being selected is just the 
chance of being selected when not running a gateway will go down considerably. This. This does mean 
real will go down likely as there will be epochs when someone will be just running a mixed node and not 
be selected for the active set. That's what. Yeah, that's what 1s that's what it looks like it's going to be. 
And then the question I wanted to ask you, Mark, what if it's not happening? How do we achieve 
something similar in terms of in terms of the mix, that being general purpose and being accessible for 
everyone? For for many purposes. Just like similar to a VPN. Yeah. So if it's not happening or not in this 
form, 2s then it's a good question. So then we have to go back to the drawing board. 1s One option would 
be to say, look, we anyway, the mixed net is not something that you're going to use to watch Netflix or 
do like basic browsing for that unless you're like a really privacy concern person. But for that you're 
probably going to use a to VPN that's going to be like to help guard VPN with him. That's going to be 
enough. And most likely you're going to limit the nets to specific use cases where speed and latency do 
not matter as much, but where privacy super important like messaging app, crypto apps that we have 
mentioned and many other use cases. 1s But it means that at least the the set of apps that we will allow 
will have to be much bigger. And for this we will probably have to rely on the community to say, okay, 
messaging app, you know, today we support like 3 or 4, but we want to support like 20 or 50. And it 
means that for each of them we'll have to keep an up to date list of what are the apps that we officially 
support, what are the addresses that we have to whitelist for us to support that and keeping that relevant 
and up to date and functioning and well, not having like bad traffic is going to take like a big effort. And 
I'm not sure, again, that name as a company can can do that, but we'll have to rely on the community to 
support us. That's the Plan B. 2s Yes. And then there will be a colossal community contribution to to 
maintain such a list, especially if we want something approximating general purpose, General purpose, 
functionality. 2s Ever going to be a general purpose because there is always going to be. 1s You know, 
things that are not going to work. So the assumption is more we will define use cases that we believe are 
important and can be solved by can be. 5s Maybe you again like crypto and messaging and productivity 
and maybe a few others, but definitely not streaming or video gaming or. Yeah, other like high speed, 
low latency use cases. And then for each of these use cases, we're going to have to say, okay, we want 
these apps and these services to be allowed. But again, it's like a huge effort because like there is like 
thousands of these apps and services. 1s Mm. 3s All right, Well, wait. I think we have community 
questions. Um. 1s Uh, I'm not sure whether either of us can answer this from Nick. He's asking, will 
Smosh require mixed node runners to change servers? Will it. Will it need more resources or bandwidth? 
2s Uh. 3s So the smoosh itself, 2s I don't know again. But then for this new thing with the exit nodes, the 
assumption is that it will probably increase a lot the the resources and bandwidth because the by making 
that change to service is going to be much more compelling and you're going to be able to do much more 
stuff through the mix net. And we expect the that both the traffic per user is going to so the traffic per 
user is going to increase a lot. But also just the plain number of users is going to also increase a lot 
because it's a much more usable product. 3s Thanks for that answer. My understanding also is that 
already, if I'm not mistaken, running a gateway is more resource intensive than just a mix node. So if you 
scooch those together, then then you know the end result. Even at the current kind of low usage mixed 
net, which is not being used a lot. So there's not a lot of stuff to mix and, and process. Um, 1s it would, it 
would require more resources. And then if you scale it up and if you onboard millions of users then then 
probably gateways will be will be a bit more resource intensive accordingly. A very important question 
coming up, Mark. Um, who's entitled? This is also from Covax. Thanks for the great questions, by the 
way. Covax. Appreciate it. So who's entitled to edit, maintain the deny list with the node operators? Be 
able to overrule your central denial list. I think this is very important stuff. Do we do we know 2s yet if 
it's been discussed? It's not 1s final yet. 1s Um, 1s so let's say there's two options. So there's the option 
that's nice for operators and there is the option that's nice for users and easy for them. The option that is 
nice for operators is to say, yeah, every operator gets to basically start from like a main list that is defined 
by the committee and then they can tweak that and allow or deny more or less services, ports. IPS Based 
on my level of comfort and based on the country where I operate, which. 1s For the node operators, 
obviously like the ideal scenario. The downside with that is that there's a risk that users, depending on the 
gateway that they get assigned to for a given epoch, they may sometimes get access to a service or not, 
depending on the settings that have been made by the by the node operator. So that's why we would 
encourage node operators to stick to something quite standard so that the experience for end users is 
consistent across networks. An option B is to say we force the the list to be the same on everybody all the 
time, which means that technically it's very simple that, you know, users always have the same consistent 
experience. But then the risk is that if operate in a country where certain services or certain ports would 
get into trouble, then that's bad for me as an operator. And ultimately it will also degrade the service 
because we'll have less exit nodes. So. 1s Yeah, we have to find a balance. Probably it's going to go 
towards letting the operator customize a bit the list, 1s but we have to be aware of the technical 
consequences and probably encourage people to stay as standard as possible. 1s So just to spell it out, if 
if node operators can configure their own list, that would mean that depending on the node you're 
connected to you as an end user, you would be maybe able to to do something and maybe not exactly. 
You know. And is there any way to solve that? By the way, just theoretically, it sounds like a very 
complex problem to solve, but would there be any any way to solve it? 2s No way would be to say. And 
again, then it gets complex, but it could be to circuit this. When user gets request decline, then we can 
detect that Actually it's due to customization made by the by the exit gateways. And then we basically 
route you to another gateway that that has this request allowed. 1s But it would require like probably a lot 
of effort. And then in terms of usage for, for the end user, this would look like, okay, I'm requesting the 
service and it takes, you know, not milliseconds but the second maybe to to get to that because I have to 
change the exit gateway and so on. So it's it's a bit messy. I don't know. We have to find the solution for 
that. 1s Hmm. 1s Yeah. Sounds like an interesting problem to solve. 3s All right. Well, maybe. Maybe if 
you know and I know I'm asking some stuff that that may not be very clear yet at this point, But but if 
you had to bet by when will this decision be made and 1s and when can we from the community, you 
know, whether we're going to go with it or not? 2s You know, so so this is still something that's being 
designed We have to go through the results of the survey to see. Okay, do we. 1s You will have a 
sentiment that going with the with this. 2s The denialist thing is preferred? Or do we have the feeling that 
we should stick to more of a service based allow list based on the on the comfort of the operators and the 
and the the experience for end users. And then for each of these, then we have to go deeper into the 
options, like what it means, like what happens when operators get 1s the possibility to customize the list, 
For example, what's the impact on end usage? And we have to strike the balance where basically 
minimize and satisfaction. 4s That makes sense. I mean, maybe if these are the options, once those 
options are clear, we could put up a vote in our node operating community because right now it's a bit 
nebulous. We only asked about one of the options basically, and gather feedback on that. We could also 
put up a vote, you know which one? 1s Scenario should should happen or which one would people would 
people prefer? 3s Um, yeah. So for that, let us come back with more bullets on these two items on the on 
the two models. What are the implications? I think the model with the analysis is much more 
straightforward. The only concern is how do we 2s how do we make sure that together with the 
community, we we have a. 2s You know, a list of apps and services that is maintained over time that is 
consistent and useful for everyone and that still has a lot of value for end users. But think this is 
something quite straightforward as compared to opening access nodes, which has actual legal 
consequences, which is something that needs much more research. 1s Mm. 2s Okay. Well, I think that 
brings us to the end of my questions, at least. And I don't see any from the community either. 7s A 
Kovacs is saying we're very surprised by the level of centralized governance censorship you're 
introducing here that's maybe addressed that. 4s So with. 3s Go ahead. Yeah. I don't know if that person 
can can intervene or not. But I'd love to have some clarity on the question. So what is actually meant 
there? 1s Well, just the fact that that 2s this what we described is is not a decentralized model, right? It's 
it's more it's more of a centralized model, both in terms of decision making and 1s and the end result, I 
would say, right, is I don't want to put words in your mouth. So. 3s Oh, yeah. So denialist is censorship. 
Yeah, that's what he means. 3s Okay, then. I don't understand the point. I mean, if so, because if we say 
basically we have two models we can go for, like we have the current model, which let's say it's called 
the list model, where we say, okay, these and these these apps, these apps, these services are allowed and 
that's it. And the other model is more of the denialist model will recirculate these IPS ports and things are 
known to be abusive, spammy or whatever. And we we denied them together as a community because we 
say this is typically bad traffic that we don't want to have within them. So these are the two main models, 
right? And I don't get why the denialist model would be associated with censorship. 2s I mean, 
technically. Technically, that's right. Because you deny stuff, which means that you censor it. But also 
maybe. Let's talk a little bit about something that we didn't touch on Mark so far is what list, what list 
we're planning to use. So it's not, you know, like an arbitrary list of things that that we want to ban 
because we don't like them. But it's like an existing list of, of malicious stuff. I forget the name. 2s Okay. 
And okay, read the comment like, who can decide what's bad or good? Yeah, but then that's fine. I think 
what we can do, I mean, again, it's not meant to be. You know, if we say in the end we allow the node 
operator to customize that list, you can go with like a completely open allow list and leave with it. So I'm 
not censoring anything like not censoring like spam and so on. And then you have to leave with the 
consequences. I think what NiMH wants to offer in this model is to say, okay, together with the 
community, we have defined a list that allows a good experience for end user and allows a good 
experience for node operators. And and then you can decide to remove items from the list. You can 
decide to add more if you feel less comfortable. And and that's it. So the list is more meant to be a 
baseline but not meant to be. This is what Nim or what the community thinks is good or bad. And again, 
it's not for us to judge what the end user should access. It's also about, you know, if not operators goes to 
jail and then suddenly all the node operators turn off their nodes, then it doesn't exist anymore. So we 
have to find that balance. 3s Um, but what was the name of that list that already exists? It's Tor. Knoll is 
the name of it. 2s Yes, there is two, at least two things that we are aware of. There's probably many more. 
Tours has what they call exit policies, which are port based. Allow lists where we allow Http, Https, FTP, 
Sftp, etcetera. 1s And then there is Turnell, which is an IP based deny list where we say, okay, we deny 
these and these IP addresses because they're known to be spammy addresses. 2s So potentially we'll have 
a combination of both. 2s Yeah. Again, it's not it's not well defined. It's more something that we have 
explored. We, we know what it does and then we'll have to make our own version of that. 4s All right. 
Well, guess that brings us to the end of the questions and closing remarks, Mark. 2s Okay. Thanks. 
Thanks for the for the good time here. Thanks for all the questions. I understand the concerns. Just keep 
in mind that it's. Yeah, we have to strike the balance between 1s the end user experience, which is I want 
to be private and want I want to protect my privacy as I use connected services, which can be potentially 
anything all my connected life. And then there is the node operators experience, which is ultimately we 
don't want any of them to end up in a police station or in jail because of them running an exit node. And 
ultimately the balance has to be in between the two and we want them to be as open as possible so that 
we have as many users as possible and so as we can increase the revenues for everyone. But at the same 
time, we don't want to end up with the legal trouble, both for individuals but also for for the reputation. 1s
Hmm. So, yeah. 2s Beautiful closing thoughts. Let's keep the conversation going, folks. So it's obviously, 
as you heard, it's very much a work in progress and nothing has decided yet. So so we'll make sure to 
keep you posted 1s on what's happening internally. And you know what what all of this stuff will end up 
bringing bringing for you in terms of changes and timelines and all of that. As that becomes that becomes 
relevant. 1s And then maybe Mark, next time around we can do a proper intro review. We kind of rush 
through the intro. And normally when when someone joins, it's kind of a bit of a tradition that bring them 
on the community call and give them to the community. Sorry for not doing that with you properly. 1s
Yeah, no problem. If you want to. To know more about myself. You can prepare that together and then 
introduce that to community. 1s All right. Well, folks, on that note, I would like to wish everybody a very 
lovely weekend. The call was recorded so it will be at some point uploaded to our YouTube channel. 
Um, I would I would urge everybody to keep the conversation going on on our matrix server. So. 1s That 
in the chat. 1s Um. 3s Yeah. Most of you I know are already on it. But those who aren't. This is the. This 
is the place for serious conversations. 4s Oh, yeah. And I almost forgot our beautiful pizza. Jay created a 
pull up for this event. So if you want to claim that, then read the instructions in chat. You will need to dm 
him and and claim your pull up. Big thanks for joining. Big thanks for coming on, Mark, and taking the 
time. Hopefully you had a bit of fun. 2s Yes. Thanks, Sulu. And you hope to get that clarified very soon 
and get to a nice initiative together with the community. 2s Amen. Have a lovely weekend, everybody. 
Bye. 1s Thank you. Bye bye
